To edit products,
we first of all need to change how this edit product screen is loaded right
because right now we always load with the assumption that we're creating a new product,
for example edited product,
I initialize this to be an empty product or a product with a couple of empty values here.
Now let's first of all think about how this page should open when we want to edit a product.
Well for that, on the user product screen where we have this edit button, to be precise in the user product
item widget there where we have this edit button, here in onPressed,
I of course want to use my navigator and then simply push, not push replace but push my named route
which of course should be that
edit route.
So here, I can import from the screens folder the edit product screen and that's what I want to push here.
So here, I want to push the edit product screen routeName but here, I then went to forward an argument
as well because I want to let this screen know about which product I want to edit,
so I want to forward the ID of that product.
So here in the user product item, I expect to also get that ID, so I'll add this as an argument which
I need to receive which I then store in this property and then we can forward this ID as an argument
so that indeed edit product screen, we can load the product or search the product with that ID. For
that, we have to go to the user product screen where we use the user product item and now here we have
to pass the ID of the product.
Now that's not too hard,
we can simply access the product where we're looking at when we're building this item here and there,
we can pass the ID as a value to user product item.
So with that, this ID is forwarded as an argument in our routing action here and therefore we can extract
it in the edit product screen.
Now a perfect place to extract it would be in initState but as you learned earlier in this course, modal
route of context which we use to get the settings and then the arguments doesn't work here in that state,
so we can't use it.
Other than that, it would be perfect,
so if you had the data from some other source instead from our routing action, you could definitely use
initState
but we can simply use didChangeDependencies which also runs before build is executed
and I just want to make sure that I don't run this too often, so I'll add a new variable, isInit, which
initially is true so that I only run the following logic if isInit is true
and when we ran this for the first time because didChangeDependencies will run multiple times, I will
simply set isInit to false
so that for future executions of didChangeDependencies, we don't reinitialize our form. Now with that,
we can extract our product ID here from the modal route by using of context there, tapping into
the settings and there into the arguments and we know that this will be a string because the arguments
we receive here is only one piece of data and that of course is the ID we're forwarding here. So that's
what we extract here and with the product ID, we can of course use our provided products to find the
product there.
For that, we can use provider of context and of course, let it know that we are looking for the products
class or for the products object and there, we already added a find by ID method earlier in the course.
We can use that to get a product with that ID
and of course, make sure you set listen to false here so that we only fetch this one time and we don't
set up an ongoing listener. With that here, we get our product that we're looking for and this is now the
product we want to use to initialize
the edited product.
So I'll set
edited product equal to product or we immediately set edited product equal to what we retrieve here
at this point.
So with that, we're loading the product we need from our list of products for that given ID
and we initialize the edited product with that data.
The missing piece is that we now need to initialize all the form inputs with some default values.
So down there in the build method, I want to make sure that this text form field has either an empty
default value if we're adding a new product or the existing title of the product we're editing. Now an easy
way of doing that is to add yet another variable here, initValues, that could just be a map but you
could also use a new object or a new class which you create for that purpose, where I have a title key
with an empty value map to it, a description key with an empty value, a price key with an empty string
and that's important, a string, not a number
and also the imageUrl which holds an empty string.
These are my initValues which are set up for a new product and I will simply override them here in
didChangeDependencies if we have an edited product which we clearly have at this point here.
So here, we can now set the initValues
equal to a new map, where I set the title equal to editedProduct.title, the description equal to
editedProduct.description, the price equal to editedProduct.price.toString however, I want
to store this as a string and output this as a string in the input and also the imageUrl is set
to editedProduct.imageUrl.
I use strings only here because the inputs, the text form fields only work with strings,
you also might remember that for the validator, you always get back a string because the text inputs
only work with strings, even if it's a number,
you have to do that conversion and since they receive and work with strings, I convert my number to a
string before I pass it into the text form fields.
Before we do any passing, there's one important check
I should add here though. When we're extracting the product ID, we might not have one of course,
we only will have one if we indeed did load this route with an argument. didChangeDependencies will always run
when this page is opened though, so also when we add a new product.
Now when we add a new product, then we reached that route because on the user product screen, we pressed
that plus, this add icon here in our action bar and here, I'm not passing any arguments to the route. So
retrieving arguments actually may fail and therefore on the edit product screen, when we retrieve the
product here,
we absolutely have to check whether we do have a product before we continue.
So I'll check if product ID
is unequal to null which means we do have a product ID and only then I want to grab my edited product
and override the initValues,
otherwise I'll not do that. In all circumstances, isInit should be set to false thereafter though.
So now with that, we're initializing the values differently
if we did find an ID and if we did load a product therefore and now the initValues can be used here
in our build method or in our widget tree. On every text form field, you can set an initial value and
that should now be initValues title and so on for all your text form fields and this will be stored
as an initial value in that field which you can then build up on.
So we do the same here and access the price and do the same down here to also access the description
and of course, do the same down there for the image to access our imageUrl.
And now with that if we do a full restart here, maybe the full refresh I should say and we go
to manage products and I added the red shirt, I get an error and this error, if we have a look at the
error message, stems from the line here where I actually do set an initial value for my imageUrl
and the problem here is that I also use a controller for the imageUrl. Now you can't use both,
if you have a controller, you can't set the initial value, instead
then you should set the controller to an initial value and that will be reflected back into the text
form field and what you see on the screen automatically.
So therefore here, we should go up to the place where we set all the initial values in didChangeDependencies
and not do this for the imageUrl,
instead simply set imageUrl here to an empty string or to null and rather,
reach out to the imageUrl controller and set the text here equal to the editedProduct.imageUrl
and this is how you should do that.
If you do that and you do a hot refresh here and we now go to manage products and click edit,
now this works and you see that's all prepopulated.
The problem now would be if I hit save,
this would be added as another new product
and of course that's not what I want,
I want to edit the existing product instead. To edit the existing product instead of to create a new
product, we have of course this saveForm method where we do call add product in the end
and that's the place where we need to step in and do something else because there, I want to check if
edited product has an ID because that's a good criteria for finding out whether we're editing
or not. Edited product ID is only set
if we loaded a product because we received an ID as an argument because if we receive an ID as an argument,
we kick off this whole logic here where we find a product by ID and that's our edited product then
and this obviously has an ID,
we're finding it by ID. Instead
if you're adding a new product, edited product is set equal to a product where we set the ID to
null,
so where we don't have an ID and therefore this is a great check. If we have an ID, so if this is
not equal to null, then I know that I'm editing. If we have an ID and it's not equal to null, then this
product existed before,
otherwise we're adding,
so in the else case, I want to call add product, in the edit case I want to update an existing product.
And for that, let's go to products and make sure we have a method that allows us to update.
So a new method, update product, which certainly will need the ID of that product we want to update and
then also the new product or whatever you want to name it.
Now here, we can first of all look for that product with that ID in our items,
so here in items, we can get the index where a certain condition is are met.
Again this takes a function which runs for every item and I want to check if product ID is equal to
the ID I'm getting here and this will give me the prodIndex in my list of items and I'll need that
index again to then replace that item at that index with a new product because I then want to say items
for that prodIndex I found, there
the item which is currently stored at that index should be overridden by a new product here in the
end,
right, by the product I'm getting because this will then be the new product and therefore this is what
I want to store here and thereafter of course call notify listeners. Now we could also add an if check
to first of all check if we found a product with that index,
so if prodIndex is greater than zero or greater equal than zero, it should be and that avoids that
we try to update products which we don't have, though in this app, we shouldn't be able to get into
a position where we try to update a product for which we don't have an ID.
So this is a check which currently shouldn't really be required.
Now one important note about setting our product at this index equal to the product we're getting here,
where is this new product coming from? Well update product is the method which I call from inside edit
product.
So the idea here is that I have the same logic as down there where I add a product with provider
of, listen to false
but then I call update product here and I don't just forward the edited product but of course also the
edited product ID as the identifier.
Now the problem with the edited product is that I do initialize it here,
I retrieve it from my store so to say, from my container, from my provider and that of course contains
the ID and it also contains my favorite status of the user who's logged in, check this as a favorite
or not.
Now one problem we'll have is that I constantly override this edited product in all my onSaved methods
with new products which always set the ID to null and say nothing about the favorite status which
means that we'll use the default favorite status of false to recreate these products.
Therefore, my ID gets lost and the previous favorite status gets lost. The solution is to set this equal
to editedProduct.Id and also set isFavorite equal to editedProduct.isFavorite
and do that for all the places where we create a new product,
so also down there and for the description as well
and of course also for the imageUrl, there at the bottom, here,
I also want to store the correct data.
With that, we make sure that we don't lose the ID and the favorite status which would be bad and with
all of that, here we should be able to now submit that form and either update an existing product or
add a new product. Let's try this and let's also see if our data is preserved correctly. For that
first of all, I'll favorite the red shirt,
then go to manage product and click edit here and add an exclamation mark and change the price to
39, hit save, the exclamation mark is there and if I go back to my shop now, I have my favorite status
still, the exclamation mark is here and we see the new price in the details page. So that all works, this
is updated correctly and therefore, we can now edit this too. If we add a new product, just to confirm that
this also still works,
this is a test and I use this good old dummy image which I used before,
then indeed this is added as a new product and no existing product got changed and of course, we see
that new product here as well now
and then of course we can also go ahead and edit this new product if we wanted to.
So that's all working as it should,
with that let's make sure that we can also delete our products with a click on the trash button here.